# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The Case Against Sugar is my third book on nutrition and chronic disease. It is as much a product as the earlier two of my reporting on the subject from the late 1990s onward. I remain grateful and indebted to the many hundreds of researchers and public-health authorities who graciously gave of their time to be interviewed, and to the editors, readers, and research assistants who helped shape those earlier projects and make them possible. 

This book had its genesis on January 23, 2008, when I received an e- mail from Lynn Rogut, then deputy director of the Robert Wood John- son Foundation Investigator Awards in Health Policy Research program. Lynn's e-mail suggested that I apply for one of the program's very gen- erous grants, which I very quickly did. My proposal laid out the basis of this book, and becoming a recipient of an Investigator Award in Health Policy Research from RWJF made it possible. To all those at the RWJF program, I am deeply grateful, and particularly to David Mechanic, Lynn Rogut and Cynthia Church at Rutgers, who oversaw the program during the three years of my grant. I am also indebted to the University of Cali- fornia, Berkeley, and the late (and very much missed) Pat Buffler, and her colleagues Amber Sanchez and Theresa Saunders at the School of Public Health, who administered the grant and gave me an academic base for my research. 

Chapter 8, "Defending Sugar," began its existence as the article "Sweet Little Lies" in the November/December 2012 issue of Mother Jones. That article was a joint venture with Cristin Kearns, who first introduced her- self to me in February 2011, after a talk I gave at a Denver independent bookstore. Cristin was then a working dentist, but she told me how she had taken it upon herself to investigate the sugar industry and had dis- covered a cache of confidential Sugar Association, Inc., documents ex- posing its public-relations strategy in the 1970s. Those documents be- came the basis of the Mother Jones article and now Chapter 8 as well. Cristin's investigative skills, writing, and critical thinking were indis- pensable to both. (The story can be read online at: http://www. 
motherjones.com/environment/2012/10/former-dentist-sugar- industry-lies.) I also have to thank the staff at Mother Jones who shep- herded the article through to publication?particularly Mike Mechanic (son of David), Maya Dusenberry, Maddie Oatman, Elizabeth Gettleman, and Cathy Rodgers. 

The arguments that ultimately constitute the case against sugar had a first public run in April 2011 in a New York Times Magazine cover article entitled "Is Sugar Toxic?" I'm grateful to Hugo Lindgren, Vera Titunik, David Ferguson, and the magazine's staff (circa 2011) for helping me make those arguments fit for public consumption. 
I'd like to thank Clarke Read and Maya Dusenberry (again) for their ex- tensive help with research for this book, and Nathan Riley, Devon Simp- son, and Ethan Litman, who also contributed their research skills. I'm grateful to Dan Palenchar and my old and dear friend Scott Schneid for doing what they could to help me get the facts straight. Mark Friedman, Michael Rosenbaum, and Robert Kaplan took the time to read this book in draft and help me get my thoughts straight, and for that I'm equally grateful. Any errors that remain, of course, are my responsibility alone. I'd like to thank Jeffrey Mifflin, archivist at Massachusetts General Hos- pital in Boston, and Stacey Peeples, curator-lead archivist at Pennsylva- nia Hospital in Philadelphia, for their generous assistance in providing diabetes inpatient data from their hospitals going well back into the nineteenth century. 

I'm grateful to my agent, Kris Dahl at ICM, for what is now three dec- ades of unwavering support. And I couldn't be more beholden to my edi- tor, Jonathan Segal at Knopf, who has supported my nutrition writing from the beginning and supported me as a writer in the process. He's the kind of editor that every writer dreams of having. I'd also like to thank, at Knopf, the editorial assistant Julia Ringo, publicist Jordan Rodman, production manager Claire Ong, and text designer Maggie Hinders. And special thanks to production editor Victoria Pearson. 

All three of my books on nutrition and chronic disease are pleas ultimately for better nutrition science, and for the rigorous trials ne- cessary to test critical assumptions about a healthful diet that have been publicly embraced over the years as dogma. Laura and John Ar- nold and their colleagues at the Laura and John Arnold Foundation have embraced this belief that better and more critical nutrition research is necessary for the health of the nation, and have been willing to act upon it philanthropically. For that I will always be grateful. I'd also like to thank all my colleagues over the years at the Nutrition Science Initiative for their support and friendship, and for making it possible to fund and facilitate what we consider the first stage of necessary studies. 

If my bias against sugar isn't blindingly clear by now, then I'll estab- lish it beyond doubt by saying that I am deeply grateful as well to those researchers and physicians who had the temerity to take a stand against sugar, knowing that at least some proportion of their professional col- leagues would criticize them for doing so. Peter Cleave and John Yudkin played critical roles, as I discuss in the book, and should be thanked by all for doing so. Robert Lustig at the University of California, San Francisco, has recently taken up Yudkin's torch and been singularly effective at forcing the public and scientific discussions on sugar and health. Rich- ard Johnson at the University of Colorado continues to do unique, and what may be vitally important, research, and I fear I didn't give it nearly the treatment and discussion it deserves. For narrative reasons, William Dufty's contribution to this ever-evolving controversy-the massively best-selling Sugar Blues, first published in 1975?is not mentioned in these pages, but he has to be acknowledged and thanked nonetheless. I would also like to thank and acknowledge Connie Bennett, Nancy Apple- ton, Ann Louise Gittleman, and the numerous other nutritionists, diet- itians, and physician-authors who have publicly taken up this cause. 

Finally, my wife, Sloane Tanen, has ultimately made this book possible with her love and support and her humor, not to mention her cheerful willingness, weekend after weekend, year after year, to take our boys to friends' houses and sporting events (while occasionally humming "Cat's in the Cradle") as their father withdrew to his office once again to work on a book or tilt at a windmill. To those boys, Nick and Harry, as always, go my eternal thanks, for reminding me why I do this, and keeping their sense of humor in the process. 
