# EPILOGUE: HOW LITTLE IS STILL TOO MUCH? 

It's impossible to say. In 1986, when the FDA concluded that most experts considered sugar safe (at least at the annual level of forty-two pounds per capita that the FDA administrators decided we were then consuming), and when the relevant research communities settled on caloric imbalance as the cause of obesity and saturated fat as the dietary cause of heart disease, the clinical trials necessary to begin to answer such a question were never pursued. 
The traditional response to the how-little-is-too-much question is that we should eat sugar in moderation-not eat too much of it. But this is a tautology. We only know we're consuming too much when we're getting fatter or manifesting other symptoms of insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome. At that point, the assumption is that we can dial it back a little and be fine-drink one or two sugary beverages a day instead of three, or, if we're parenting, allow our children ice cream on weekends only, say, rather than as a daily treat. But if it takes years or decades, or even generations, for us to get to the point where we mani- fest symptoms of metabolic syndrome, it's quite possible that even these apparently moderate amounts of sugar will turn out to be too much to reverse the situation and return us to health. And if the symptom or complication of metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance that mani- fests first is something other than getting fatter-cancer, for instance? we're truly out of luck. 
The authorities (or self-appointed authorities) who argue for moder- ation in our eating habits tend to be those who are relatively lean and healthy; they define moderation as what works for them. This assumes that the same approach and amount will have the same beneficial effect on all of us (and that it will continue to work for them as well). If it 
doesn't, of course, if we fail to remain lean and healthy or our children fail to do so, the assumption that, naturally again, follows from this per- spective is that we've failed in our assessment of moderation?we ate too much sugar or our children did. 
To understand this tautological logic better, imagine a situation in which cigarette smokers who don't get lung cancer (or heart disease or emphysema) assume de facto that those smokers who do are those who smoke "too much." They'd certainly be right, but it still wouldn't tell us what constitutes a healthy level of smoking, or whether such a thing as smoking in moderation even exists. How many cigarettes could be smoked without doing at least some harm to our health, and could thus constitute smoking in moderation? If we say none, we may, indeed, be right, but now we've redefined how we're willing to work with the con- cept of moderation. The same logic may also apply to sugar. If it takes twenty years of either smoking cigarettes or consuming sugar for the consequences to appear, how can we know whether we've smoked or consumed too much before it's too late? Isn't it more reasonable to de- cide early in life (or early in parenting) that not too much is as little as possible? 
Recall the thinking of Priscilla White, who went to work in 1924 with Elliott Joslin at his diabetes clinic in Boston and oversaw the treatment of the clinic's pediatric cases. “No child can grow up without a scoop of ice cream once a week," White had said, although the translation of this belief into clinical practice would require that the children who got their weekly scoop also had to inject more insulin over the course of their lives than children whose parents and doctors might have taken a stricter approach. Had White known (as she couldn't at the time) that eating a weekly scoop of ice cream and taking more insulin in response would make children suffer greater complications from their diabetes and die earlier than those who abstained from the ice cream, would that have influenced her thinking? I'd bet that it would have; I'd also bet that she would have wanted to know the increase in disease burden and decrease in longevity per scoop of ice cream consumed, if such a thing were pos- sible?as would the parents-before deciding whether a scoop a week was "too much" for these children. And if these children never ate ice cream, would they miss it any more than would a child who never takes up the habit of smoking miss the opportunity as an adult to indulge oc- casionally in a cigarette? 
Any discussion of how little sugar is too much also has to account for the possibility that sugar is a drug and perhaps addictive. Even if "people just act like it is," as Charles C. Mann has written, this suggests the possibility that having the opportunity to consume at least some sugar (or ice cream) is only meaningful in a world in which substantial sugar consumption is the norm and virtually unavoidable and everyone does it. Trying to consume sugar in moderation, however it's defined, in such a world is likely to be no more successful for some of us than trying to smoke cigarettes in moderation-just a few cigarettes a day, rather than a pack. Whether or not we can avoid any meaningful chronic effects by doing so, we may not be capable of managing our habits, or managing our habits might become the dominant theme in our lives (just as ra- tioning sweets for our children can seem to be a dominant theme in par- enting). Some of us certainly find it easier to consume no sugar than to consume a little-no dessert at all, rather than a spoonful or two before pushing the plate to the side. If sugar consumption may be a slippery slope, then advocating moderation is not a meaningful concept. 
We can also try to define "too much" from a population perspective ?perhaps too broadly, too myopically. George Campbell's estimate from the 1960s of seventy pounds of sugar per capita prior to the appearance of a diabetes epidemic may have been reasonable, and the assumption of the 1986 FDA report that forty-two pounds per capita is a safe amount may also have been, but the appearance of a diabetes epidemic and of diabetes itself are two different things. If the fuse of the diabetes epi- demic is lit a generation or more before the epidemic explodes, if the predisposition to become insulin-resistant, obese, and diabetic is passed down and amplified from mother to child in the womb, then it becomes far more difficult to establish at what level of sugar consumption a population, let alone an individual, remains healthy, or becomes healthy again if they're not. What appears to be a population threshold of sev- enty pounds per capita yearly might actually be a threshold of thirty pounds a generation or two or three earlier. Once we've crossed the threshold and are on our way to becoming an obese and diabetic popu- lation, it's likely that we have become different physiologically, that the children in a population that has been consuming a significant amount of sugar for generations have been programmed differently to respond to a sugar-rich environment from those who were born earlier. There 
may be no going back, or not without drastic changes in our diet. The ex- isting research provides no way to know. 
In my own mind, I keep returning to a few observations-unscientific as they may be?that make me question the validity of any definition of moderation in the context of sugar consumption. One was the sug- gestion by Hindu physicians more than two thousand years ago that sugar consumption could promote both nutrition and corpulence and, as Frederick Allen noted, that diabetes might be brought on by eating sugar, partly because of the sweet smell of the urine and partly because diabetes then seemed to be a disease exclusively of the affluent, who alone could afford to indulge in sugar and flour. ("This definite incrim- ination of the principal carbohydrate foods," as Allen had written, “is, therefore, free from preconceived chemical ideas, and is based, if not on pure accident, on pure clinical observation.") 
Then there was Thomas Willis in the 1670s, the first physician in Europe to note the sweet taste and smell of diabetic urine, despite a long tradition among European physicians at the time of tasting urine as a diagnostic technique. Why hadn't physicians noticed until then, primi- tive as the art of diagnosis might have been? Willis's identification of diabetes and the sweetness of the urine happens to coincide both with the first flow of sugar into England from its Caribbean colonies, and with the first use of sugar to sweeten tea, which was now being imported into England from China. 
Other observations that resonate with me when I wrestle with the concept of moderation include one of Frederick Slare's comments in 1715 in his "Vindication of Sugars Against the Charges of Dr. Willis." At a time when sugar was just beginning to make its transition in Eng- land from Sidney Mintz's "luxury of kings into the kingly luxury," Slare noted that women who cared about their figures but were "inclining to be too fat" might want to avoid sugar, because it "may dispose them to be fatter than they desire to be.” In a similar vein, the French lawyer- turned-gastronome Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin suggested in 1825 in The Physiology of Taste, perhaps the most famous book ever written about food, that obesity was caused by the consumption of starches and bread ("fecula" or "farinaceous foods," he called them) and that this fattening process occurs "more quickly and surely" when such foods are consumed with sugar. In the 1860s, the Portuguese physician Abel Jor- dao commented that sugar was likely to be a fattening agent, in turn 
prompting Charles Brigham at Harvard to observe that young women of his era, worried about the "skeleton-like appearance which their shoul- ders and arms present when exposed," had taken to consuming sugar water to put on some fat and appear more womanly. 
In all these cases, even the affluent would likely have been consuming less sugar than Campbell's seventy-pound estimate or the FDA's forty- two. When Slare made his observation in 1715, the English were con- suming, on average, perhaps five pounds of sugar a year. 
Combine these observations with the research implicating high blood sugar and insulin resistance in the intrauterine environment?the in- fluence of metabolic programming or imprinting on the generation to come?and it suggests that our consumption of sugar over the centuries may have changed the species. Transform an environment so dramatic- ally?as sugar has transformed what we eat and drink in ours?and the species in that environment will be transformed as well. It suggests that the response of individuals today to any amount of sugar is vastly differ- ent from what it would have been centuries ago. Perhaps we can tolerate less, perhaps more; we can only speculate. Nor can we say how sugar consumption in a population over generations changes the pattern of chronic diseases that appear and work to shorten lives, and how that differs, as Denis Burkitt would have noted, in different populations with different genetics. 
Imagine, for instance, a thought experiment: A population of individ- uals who have never consumed refined sugar in any quantity, other than what they eat naturally in fruits and vegetables. This population is split in two and then followed for generations. One population has access to refined sugar and high-fructose corn syrup and consumes them in ever- increasing quantities, and the other continues its relatively sugar-free existence. Both populations have access to the same advances in medical care and public health as the generations roll by. Do they both end up with the same spectrum of chronic diseases-similar levels of heart disease, diabetes, cancer, and dementia? And if the sugar-eating popula- tion, as I'm suggesting, has the far greater burden of chronic disease, and it is then taken off sugar, how many generations would have to go by be- fore the two populations were again equivalent? Would they ever be? 
That experiment can exist only in our imagination?in real life, all populations were put on the sugar-rich diet. Hence, we don't know what "normal" or "healthy" would have looked like in a sugar-free or even 
low-sugar world. We don't know what our species would have become. Would we get fat as we get older? Would our LDL cholesterol and tri- glycerides and blood pressure increase with age? Would we become ever more glucose-intolerant and resistant to the action of insulin? How long would we typically live? What diseases would ultimately kill us? These questions cannot be answered. 
Imagining such an experiment also helps us understand why future research might never be able to resolve these questions definitively. This speaks to the point I raised earlier, acknowledging that the evidence against sugar is not definitive, compelling though I may personally find it to be. Let's say we randomly assigned individuals in our population to eat a modern diet with or without sugar in it. Since virtually all pro- cessed foods have sugar added or, like most breads, are made with sugar, the population that is asked to avoid sugar would simultaneously be avoiding virtually all processed foods as well. They would dramatically reduce their consumption of what Michael Pollan has memorably called "foodlike substances," and if they were healthier, there would now be a host of possible reasons why. Maybe they ate fewer refined grains of any type, less gluten, fewer trans fats, preservatives, or artificial flavorings? We would have no practical way to know for sure. 
We could try to reformulate all these foods so that they are made without sugar, but then they won't taste the same-unless, of course, we replace the sugar with artificial sweeteners. Our population randomized to consume as little sugar as possible is likely to lose weight, but we won't know if it happened because they ate less sugar, or fewer calories of all sorts. Indeed, virtually all diet advice suffers from this same com- plication: whether you're trying to avoid gluten, trans fats, saturated fats, or refined carbohydrates of all types, or just trying to cut calories? eat less and eat healthy?an end result of this advice is that you're often avoiding processed foods containing sugar and a host of other ingredi- ents. If we benefit, we cannot say exactly why. It is too complicated.* Diet advice that recommends we eat whole foods and avoid processed foods (foodlike substances) removes virtually all refined sugars by definition; diet advice to avoid sugar means, by definition, that we avoid virtually all processed foods. 
Artificial sweeteners (noncaloric sweeteners, as the USDA calls them) as a replacement for sugar muddy these waters even more. Much of the anxiety about these sweeteners was generated in the 1960s and 1970s 
by the research, partly funded by the sugar industry, as we've seen, that led to the banning of cyclamates as a possible carcinogen, and the suggestion that saccharin could cause cancer (at least in rats, at extra- ordinarily high doses). Though this particular anxiety has tapered off with time, it has been replaced by the suggestion that maybe these ar- tificial sweeteners can cause metabolic syndrome, and thus obesity and diabetes. 
This conjecture comes primarily from epidemiological studies that show an association between the use of artificial sweeteners and obesity and diabetes. But whether this means artificial sweeteners cause obesity and diabetes is, again, impossible to say. It is likely that people who are predisposed to gain weight and become diabetic are also the people who use artificial sweeteners instead of sugar. The latest review articles on the subject of possible dangers from artificial sweeteners suggest that the evidence is, indeed, far short of definitive. Though the possibility can't be ruled out that consuming artificial sweeteners will lead to in- creases in morbidity and mortality, it seems unlikely. 
As Philip Handler, head of the National Academies of Sciences, sug- gested in 1975, or as President Teddy Roosevelt did in 1907, what we want to know is whether using artificial sweeteners over a lifetime? or even a few years or decades?is better or worse for us than how- ever much sugar we would have consumed instead. It's hard for me to imagine that sugar would have been the healthier choice. But the research can say no more definitively about this question than it can about the long-term effects of consuming sugar. Laboratory research has identified mechanisms by which artificial sweeteners might trigger physiological responses in the body similar to those triggered by sugar. We have sweet-taste receptors in our guts and digestive tracts, as well as in our mouths, for instance, and so the same molecules that trigger these and fool the brain into thinking we're consuming sugar might fool the body as well. If it does, though, there's little evidence that it results in deleterious effects on food intake, metabolic syndrome, and body weight of the kind observed with sugar itself. If the goal is to get off sugar, then replacing it with artificial sweeteners is one way to do it. Whether con- suming artificial sweeteners for years or decades brings on its own nox- ious effects, or prevents us from benefiting fully from a sugar-free diet, is something that the existing research cannot say. 
The research community can certainly do a much better job than it has in the past of testing all these questions. But we may have a very long wait before the public-health authorities fund such studies and give us the definitive answers we seek. What do we do until then? 
Ultimately and obviously, the question of how much is too much be- comes a personal decision, just as we all decide as adults what level of alcohol, caffeine, or cigarettes we'll ingest. I've argued here that enough evidence exists for us to consider sugar very likely to be a toxic sub- stance, and to make an informed decision about how best to balance the likely risks with the benefits. To know what those benefits are, though, it helps to see how life feels without sugar. Former cigarette smokers (of which I am one) will tell you that it was impossible for them to grasp intellectually or emotionally what life would be like without cigarettes until they quit; that through weeks or months or even years, it was a constant struggle. Then, one day, they reached a point at which they couldn't imagine smoking a cigarette and couldn't imagine why they had ever smoked, let alone found it desirable. 
A similar experience is likely to be true of sugar-but until we try to live without it, until we try to sustain that effort for more than days, or just a few weeks, we'll never know. 

* The diet that many public-health authorities believe is the healthiest is known as DASH-Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension. The authors of the first study on DASH described it as "rich in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy foods and with reduced saturated fat and total fat.” A primary goal of this dietary prescription is to provide significant potassium, magnesium, and calcium, with the assumption that this in turn will lower blood pressure. But it also prohibits sugar, sweets, and sugary beverages other than fruit juices. Its benefits may come as much from that restriction as any other. 
